Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Official YIFY movies site:
And what's the plan?
It will only
confuse you.
Listen. I can't be
any more confused
than I already am.
Steve. I would
rather be prosecuting
than defending you.
Why?
Because I think
you're guilty as hell.
Well. maybe I should
get another lawyer then.
Well. I'm not
looking forward to
twisting the Navy's arm.
Why? What. are you
scared of the brass?
Worse.
Respectful.
You know. sometimes I think
the Navy's a master plan
designed by geniuses
for execution by idiots.
Where did you hear that?
I couldn't have just
made that up myself?
Could have made up
the Gettysburg Address too.
Where'd you hear it?
That's one of
Tom Keefer's wisecracks.
Oh.
Thomas Keefer.
your novelist friend.
Yeah.
He's got the sharpest mind
on the ship.
He's sharp. all right.
He knows everything Queeg did.
I'm sure he does.
The trial counsel
will state the charge
and specification.
Charge one. mutiny.
Violation of Article 94.
Uniform Code
of Military Justice.
Specification: In that
Lieutenant Stephen Maryk.
while serving
as executive officer
aboard the USS   Caine.
did on December 18th. 2022.
commit an act of mutiny.
Lieutenant Maryk willfully.
and without proper authority.
and without
justifiable cause
did relieve from duty
Lieutenant Commander
Philip Francis Queeg.
then serving
as the duly appointed
commanding officer
of the USS   Caine.
who was then
in lawful exercise
of his command.
How do you plead?
Not guilty.
Defense will stipulate
that Lieutenant Maryk
was serving
as executive officer
aboard the USS   Caine.
18 December. 2022.
Trial counsel.
you may call
your first witness.
Call Lieutenant Commander Queeg.
Do you solemnly swear
that the evidence you give
shall be the truth.
the whole truth
and nothing but the truth.
so help you God?
I do.
Be seated.
[prosecutor]
State your name. rank
and present position.
Philip Francis Queeg.
Lieutenant Commander.
United States Navy.
currently attached
to Headquarters. Fifth Fleet.
awaiting reassignment.
Do you recognize
the accused?
[Queeg] Yes.
Lieutenant Maryk.
US Navy.
Commander Queeg.
on December 18th. 2022.
were you in command
of the USS   Caine?
Yes. I was.
What type of vessel
is the   Caine?
Well. her official
designation is an MCM--
mine countermeasures ship.
And what is
her primary mission?
Well. the   Caine
is designed to detect
and neutralize sea-based mines.
We conduct
minesweeping operations
as directed anywhere
in the Persian Gulf.
with an emphasis
on the Straits of Hormuz.
Commander.
on December 18th. 2022.
were you relieved of command
of the   Caine?
Yes.
By whom?
The accused.
Lieutenant Maryk.
[prosecutor] Was this
a standard watch change?
No. it was
totally irregular.
How would you
describe it?
[scoffs]
Well. the most charitable
description would be
that it was an incident.
a regrettable incident
of the temporary
and total collapse
of military discipline.
Commander. please relate
all the facts that bear
on this unauthorized relief.
Okay. well.
the   Caine   sortied from Bahrain
on December 16th.
Our mission was to sweep
for mines from the Persian Gulf
through the Straits of Hormuz.
When a cyclone came along
the operation was canceled.
and the boat
started to maneuver
to evade the storm.
The storm
was traveling due west.
[prosecutor]
What was the date and time
of that course change?
Well. that would be
early morning
of the 18th. ma'am.
And as I say. the storm was
pretty bad at that point.
Visibility was almost zero.
Couldn't see
any of the other ships
in the detachment.
We were sailing blind through
the rain and the spray.
and with the wind
and the sea and all.
we had to maneuver
using engines and rudders
to hold the evasion course
that had been ordered.
But w-we were doing fine.
My executive officer. however.
pretty early in the game.
began to show
unusual symptoms
of nervousness.
What were
these symptoms?
Well. for example. he started
talking pretty early--
Couldn't have been more
than half an hour after
the ship started running south--
that we needed
to operate independently
and come around to the north.
Why did he want
to do that?
Well. to give you the picture.
the cyclone was coming at us
from the east.
We were on
the western edge of it.
which means where we were.
the wind was from due north.
Now. the   Commodore.   of course.
was running south with the wind
to get out of the storm's path.
which was in accordance with
all existing storm doctrine.
My exec. however.
insisted that our ship
was on the verge of foundering
and that we had better
turn into the wind.
wh-which was the north.
if we were to survive.
Now... [chuckles]
...of course. we weren't
in that bad of shape.
And that's what
I mean by nervousness.
What was your objection
to coming north.
as your executive officer
suggested?
Well. everything was wrong
with that idea
that could be wrong with it.
I mean. in the first place.
my orders were to proceed south.
My ship wasn't in danger.
It--
It was functioning normally.
Uh. to drop out of station
and act independently
under those circumstances
is out of the question.
And to come around north
would be to head
the ship directly into
the heart of the cyclone.
It was a senseless suggestion
and. under the circumstances.
almost suicidal.
I have since checked
all of my decisions
of December 18th
with the finest
ship handlers I know.
ranking all the way up
to rear admiral.
and unanimously they agree
that the only course
in that situation was south.
[prosecutor]
Commander. your last remark
was hearsay.
Oh. I'm-- I'm sorry.
I'm not up
on these legal distinctions
as well as I should be.
I guess.
[prosecutor]
It's perfectly all right.
Will defense counsel move
to strike out the part of
the testimony which was hearsay?
All right. so move.
[prosecutor]
Please continue.
Well. i-it's just that Maryk's
insistence on us coming around
became more and more strident
as the weather deteriorated.
I finally became
concerned about him
when suddenly
he moved towards me
and out of the blue said
I was on the sick list
and that he was relieving me.
I-I-- To be honest.
I couldn't believe my ears.
Took me a moment
to catch on.
It wasn't until
he started shouting orders
at the officer of the deck
and started countermanding
my instructions
that I-I did begin to
realize what was going on.
Commander.
can you recall anything
that could have provoked
your executive officer's act?
Truthfully. no.
I don't think
my bearing or manner
had anything to do with it.
Look... it was
a pretty scary situation
in that wheelhouse.
Winds were force ten to 12.
screeching and all.
and the waves
were mountainous.
The barometer had dropped
about as low as it's ever
been in US Navy history.
and we took
a very bad roll.
And I mean a very bad one.
I've done a lot
of North Atlantic
rolling too.
I just think that Maryk
simply went into a panic.
[prosecutor]
Mmm.
Was the   Caine
in grave danger
at that time?
Well. I-I wouldn't say that.
no. ma'am.
I-I thought
we righted ourselves very nicely
out of that bad roll.
He repeatedly tried to
order me off the bridge.
but I stayed right where I was
and gave him orders
only as I thought necessary
for the safety of the ship.
I-In the situation.
I thought that the chief hazard
would be any further
act of frenzy on his part.
And to the extent that
the   Caine   did come through
that storm safely.
despite the unprecedented...
[chuckles] ...running amok
of my executive officer.
I believe that my handling
of the emergency
was the correct one.
Did Maryk cite
any authority at all
when he relieved you?
Oh. he mumbled something
about our Article 1108.
I didn't even catch it
at the time.
It wasn't till later
that he said his authority
was Article 1108
of Navy Regulations.
And were you familiar
with these articles?
Certainly.
In substance.
what do they provide?
Well. it's my understanding
that they make it possible
for the executive officer
to relieve the captain
i-in an emergency.
a highly unusual emergency
where-- where the captain is...
[chuckles]
Well. frankly.
where the captain
is absolutely unhinged.
Were these articles
properly invoked
in your situation?
Well. I'm sort of
an interested party here.
But you don't have
to take my word for it.
I was successfully
conning my ship
through that cyclone.
and fortunately for me.
I have 130 witnesses
of that fact.
Everybody aboard that ship.
Uh. Commander. sorry.
there again. sir.
you're testifying
to the conclusions
of others.
Well. obviously I'm not
a legal expert. Sorry.
Strike the witness's
last sentence
from the record.
Have you ever been
mentally ill. sir?
No.
Were you ill in any way
when Mr. Maryk relieved you?
I was not.
Did you warn your
executive officer of
the consequences of his act?
I told him he was performing
a mutinous act.
[prosecutor]
And what was his reply?
He expected to be
court-martialed.
He was going
to retain command anyway.
What was the attitude of
Lieutenant Junior Grade Keith.
the officer of the deck?
Keith was in
a state of panic
as bad as Maryk's.
[prosecutor]
What was the attitude
of the helmsman?
Stilwell
was emotionally unbalanced
and for some reason
very devoted to Mr. Keith.
They both backed Maryk.
Is there anything else.
Commander Queeg.
that you would care to state
in connection with the events
of December 18th
aboard the   Caine?
[exhales] Well. I just...
I've thought a lot about
all of this. obviously.
It's the gravest occurrence
in my career.
The only questionable one
I-I'm aware of.
I-I just think that
if the officer of the deck
had been anyone
other than this
immature Mr. Keith
and the helmsman
anyone other than Stilwell.
then none of this
would have happened.
I mean. a competent officer
would have repudiated
Maryk's orders
and a normal sailor
at the helm
would have disregarded
both of those officers
and obeyed me.
It was just bad luck
that these three men.
Maryk. Keith
and Stilwell.
combined against me
at such a crucial time.
Bad luck for me
and I'm afraid
even worse luck for them.
[officer] The court
would like to
question the witness.
Commander Queeg.
you've taken
all the prescribed physical
and mental examinations
incident to entrance to
the academy. graduation.
commissioning. promotion
and so forth?
Yes. sir. for 21 years.
Does your medical record
contain any history of illness.
mental or physical?
No. sir. it does not.
Have you ever had
an unsatisfactory fitness
report. Commander Queeg?
Negative. sir.
Commander. can you account for
Lieutenant Maryk's opinion
that you were mentally ill?
[chuckles]
All I can say. sir.
is that I assumed command
over an extremely...
disorganized and dirty ship.
and that's not a reflection
on the officer that I relieved.
The   Caine   had gone through
a year and a half
of arduous duty
a-and it was understandable.
But still. for the safety
of that ship and its crew.
it demanded to be shaped up.
and I took a lot
of strong measures.
a-and Lieutenant Maryk
did not see eye to eye
with me at all
on this idea
of making the   Caine
a tight ship again.
[chuckles]
Well. maybe--
maybe he thought I was crazy
to keep trying.
Anyway. that's
the picture of it. sir.
[officer] Thank you.
[prosecutor]
Your witness.
Commander Queeg.
I would like to ask you
whether you have
ever heard the expression
"Old Yellowstain."
In which connection?
Old Yellowstain. sir.
No. I have not.
You weren't aware
that all the officers
of the   Caine
habitually referred to you
as Old Yellowstain?
I object to the question.
Impertinent badgering
of the witness.
How does Defense Counsel
Greenwald justify
this line of questioning?
Please the court.
the nickname Old Yellowstain.
used by the officers
of the   Caine.
will be relevant
to the issue
of mental competence.
Before ruling. the court wishes
to caution defense counsel.
This is a most unusual
and delicate case.
The honor and career
of an officer
with an unblemished
military record of 21 years
standing is involved.
The defense counsel
will have to bear
full responsibility
for the conduct
of this case.
Subject to
the foregoing comment.
the trial counsel's objection
is overruled.
Court stenographer
will repeat the question.
"You aren't aware. then.
that all the officers
of the   Caine
have habitually
referred to you
as Old Yellowstain?"
I was not aware of that.
No further questions.
For now.
Commander Queeg will be called
as a witness for the defense.
For the defense?
Yes. sir.
You're excused.
subject to recall.
Thank you. sir.
[prosecutor]
Call Lieutenant Thomas Keefer.
State your name. rank
and present station.
Thomas Keefer. Lieutenant.
United States Navy.
communication officer
of the USS   Caine.
If you recognize
the accused.
state his name.
Lieutenant Steve Maryk.
executive officer
of the   Caine.
What is your occupation
in civilian life?
I'm a writer.
And has any of your work
been published?
A number of short stories
have been published. yes. ma'am.
Did you do any writing
in your spare time
while in service?
Yes. I have completed
half a war novel.
[chuckles]
And what's the title?
Multitudes. Multitudes.
And has this novel.
though incomplete.
recently been accepted
by a publisher?
Yes.
Now. Lieutenant Keefer.
were you serving
aboard the   Caine
in your present capacity
on December 18th.
2022?
Yes.
Was Captain Queeg
relieved of his command
on that date?
He was.
By whom?
The executive officer.
Describe how you learned
that the captain
had been relieved.
Uh. well. Mr. Maryk
passed word for all officers
to come up to the wheelhouse.
When we got there. he told us
that the captain was sick
and he had assumed command.
Did Captain Queeg
show any external signs
of being sick?
Look. at the height
of a cyclone--
Was he raving.
or was he foaming. or--
No. no.
Did he look any worse off
than. say. Lieutenant Keith?
No.
Or Maryk?
W-We were all tired.
dripping and wiped out.
Mr. Keefer.
did you make any effort
to persuade Mr. Maryk
to restore Queeg
to command?
No. I did not.
Did you not feel
the seriousness
of the moment?
I certainly did.
Why did you take
no remedial action?
I wasn't present
when the captain was relieved.
Maryk was in full command.
The entire ship was
obeying his orders.
I thought that.
for the safety of the ship.
my best course was
to obey his orders.
Mr. Keefer. were you
aboard the   Caine
throughout the period
that Captain Queeg
was in command?
Yes. I was.
Did you ever observe any
evidence of insanity in him?
I don't--
I can't answer that question.
not being a psychiatrist.
Did you ever think
he might be insane?
Objection.
Witness is not an expert
and matters of opinion
are not admissible evidence.
I withdraw the question.
Mr. Keefer.
at any time prior
to December 18th.
were you informed
that Maryk suspected Queeg
of being mentally ill?
Yes. I was.
Describe
how you learned this.
Well. uh. let me see.
Two-- Two weeks
before the cyclone.
Maryk showed me
a medical log
he had kept on
Captain Queeg's behavior.
He asked me to come with him
to report the situation to--
to Admiral Williams.
Commander Fifth Fleet.
And did you consent
to go with him?
Yes. I did.
Why?
He was my superior officer
and also my close friend.
Did you believe
that Maryk's log justified
the relief of Queeg?
No. No.
As soon as we got aboard
Admiral Williams's ship.
I told him as forcibly
as I could that.
in my opinion.
the log wouldn't
justify the action.
What was his response?
After a lot of arguing.
he told me--
[clears throat]
After a lot of arguing.
he-- he followed my advice.
We returned to the   Caine.
Were you surprised
two weeks later when he
relieved the captain?
I was stunned.
Were you good with that.
Mr. Keefer?
I was badly disturbed.
I thought that. at best.
he would be involved
in grave difficulties.
I thought it was
a terrible situation
and an error on his part.
No further questions.
No questions.
Does the defense intend
to recall this witness
at a later time?
No. sir.
No cross-examination of this
highly material witness?
No. sir.
The court
will question the witness.
Mr. Keefer--
[clears throat]
Now. as to this
so-called medical log.
the facts it contained
which convinced Lieutenant Maryk
that he should
report the captain
to Admiral Williams
didn't convince you.
Is that right?
They did not. sir.
Why not?
Sir. it's not something a layman
can intelligently discuss.
You've stated
you're a close friend
of Mr. Maryk.
Yes. sir.
Well. this court
is trying to find out.
among other things.
any possible
extenuating circumstances
for his acts.
Did this medical log
merely indicate to you
that Captain Queeg
was a highly normal
and competent officer?
Sir.
speaking from ignorance.
it's always seemed to me
that mental disability
was a-- a relative thing.
Captain Queeg was
a very strict disciplinarian
and extremely meticulous
in hunting down
the smallest matters.
He wasn't the easiest person
in the world to reason with.
And there were several occasions
where I thought
he came down too hard
and spent excessive time
on small matters.
They were very unpleasant.
But to jump from them
to the conclusion that
the captain was a maniac.
no. no. I was compelled.
in all honesty.
to warn Maryk
against doing that.
[prosecutor] State your name.
rank and present station.
[clears throat]
Junius Urban.
Quartermaster Third Class.
US Navy
of the USS   Caine.
Do you recognize
the accused?
Ma'am?
Do you recognize
the accused?
M-Ma'am?
Do you recognize
the officer
at that table?
[Urban]
Wh-Which one?
There are two.
Name the one you recognize.
Th-That's the exec.
What's his name?
M-Mr. Maryk.
What is he
the exec of?
The-- The ship.
Name the ship.
The   Caine.
Thank you.
Sorry.
Urban.
on December 18th. 2022.
were you serving
aboard the   Caine
in your present capacity?
Is that
the day it happened?
The day
what happened?
I don't know.
That was the day
of the cyclone. yes.
Sure.
I-- I was aboard.
Were you
in the wheelhouse
when Mr. Maryk
relieved Captain Queeg?
Yes.
Who else
was in the wheelhouse
at the time?
Well. um. there was--
there was the captain
and M-Mr. Maryk.
Yes?
Th-Th-The helmsman.
His name?
Stilwell.
Who else?
The officer of the day.
His name?
Mr. Keith.
What were you doing
in the wheelhouse?
I had the watch.
Urban.
describe in your own words
how Lieutenant Maryk
relieved the captain.
H-He said...
"I relieve you." ma'am.
What was happening
at the time?
Well. the ship
was rolling very bad.
It was an ass-kicker storm.
Urban. describe everything
that happened
in the ten minutes
before Captain Queeg
was relieved.
Well. li-like I say.
the ship
was rolling very bad.
That's all?
Did the captain say anything?
Did the exec say anything?
Did the officer of the day
say anything?
Or did the ship
just roll in silence
for ten minutes?
Well. ma'am.
it was a cyclone.
Petty Officer Urban.
you are under oath.
W-Well...
I-I think the captain
wanted to come north.
and the exec wanted
to come s-south.
O-Or the other way around.
or something like that.
[prosecutor]
Why did the captain
want to come south?
I don't know.
Why did the exec
want to come north?
Ma'am. I'm just
a third-class petty officer.
Did the captain
act crazy?
No.
Did the execs
seem scared?
N-No.
Did the captain?
No.
Did anyone?
I-- I was goddamn scared.
I-I beg your pardon. sir.
But the captain
did not act crazy in any way
that morning. correct?
The captain
was the same as always.
Crazy or sane. Urban?
H-He was sane.
S-S-S-So far as I knew.
Petty Officer Urban.
how old are you?
Twenty.
What schooling
have you had?
[stammering] High school--
High school diploma.
[officer]
Have you been telling
the whole truth here.
or haven't you?
Sir. a-an enlisted man
o-on watch
isn't supposed to listen
to arguments between
the captain and the exec.
Did you like the captain?
S-Sure. I liked him. sir.
Continue
your examination.
No further questions.
Petty Officer Urban.
were you aboard the   Caine
when she cut
her own tow cable?
Y-Yes-- Yes. sir.
And what were you
doing at the time?
I was--
Well. that is. the captain
was bawling me out
on the bridge. sir.
What for?
My shirttail was out.
Was the captain
very strict on the subject
of shirttails?
[chuckles] Yes. sir.
He was very strict
on shirttails. sir.
And while he was
describing
your shirttail.
the ship went around
in a full circle
and steamed over
its own tow cable.
Is that what happened?
I object to this
line of questioning.
Counsel has
tricked the witness
with leading questions
into asserting that the   Caine
cut its own tow line.
a material point
that was not touched upon
in direct examination.
Please the court.
the witness has stated
that he's never
seen the captain
do anything crazy.
I'm simply trying
to refute that statement.
Defense counsel
will have the opportunity
to originate evidence later.
Objection sustained.
Cross-examination thus far
will be stricken
from the record.
Urban. what is
a paranoid personality?
Huh?
A paranoid personality.
What is it?
Sir?
Would you recognize
a psychotic person
if you saw one?
Me?
It's okay.
No further questions.
Thank you.
Petty Officer Urban.
you will not discuss
your testimony in this courtroom
with anybody. understand?
Wh-Who. sir?
Me. sir?
No. sir.
Witness excused.
Thank you. sir.
[whispering]
I see that.
uh. trial counsel
intends to call
a dozen members
of the crew of the   Caine.
Yeah?
Yeah. that's correct.
And the purpose is to confirm
Urban's testimony
no one ever
saw the captain
do anything crazy.
That is the purpose.
Okay. I'll concede that.
I'll concede
they'll all corroborate
Urban's testimony
if you concede that none of them
know any more about a paranoid
than Urban does.
Yeah. I'll gladly
accept that concession
on those terms. sir.
Okay.
Lieutenant. that's
a weighty concession.
And by your leave. sir.
I'll make that concession.
Uh-- [exhales]
Mr. Greenwald. I understand
that you were appointed
as defense counsel
by the judge advocate.
Yes. sir.
When were you
appointed?
Four days ago. sir.
Do you feel you've had enough
time to prepare your case?
Yes. sir.
Did you undertake
the assignment
willingly?
Uh. sir.
Lieutenant Greenwald
accepted the assignment
at the request
of the judge advocate.
[sighs] I see that
you're a naval aviator.
Yes. sir.
What do you fly?
Primarily
the F/A-18 Super Hornet. sir.
Why aren't you
flying now?
Medical leave. sir.
Why?
Forced to eject
from a damaged aircraft.
I see.
Did you have a chance
to practice much law?
A little. sir.
[sighs]
Lieutenant Maryk.
Yes. sir.
I need to know if you're
happy with your counsel's
conduct of the defense.
Sir. if he answers
that question.
he does on blind faith.
Can I just have a moment
to speak to my client privately?
[sighs]
Two minutes.
[Greenwald]
Come on.
Thank you.
So. do you want
to get rid of me?
I don't know.
I think I'm screwed
at this point.
Fifteen years
in the brig?
Mm-hmm.
Tell me one thing.
Why didn't you
cross-examine Tom?
I don't have time
to tell you everything.
Tom Keefer knows everything
the captain did. Everything.
I'm sure he does.
If he wouldn't talk.
it's up to you
to drag it out.
Wasn't it?
You don't understand.
No. I don't understand
what you're doing.
That's for sure.
I want to fight
this case.
Why?
Because
I want to win it.
Why?
Is that not enough?
Before you said you'd
rather be prosecuting
than defending me.
So maybe this is
your bizarre way
of prosecuting.
Steve. listen to me
very carefully.
Implicating Keefer
harms you.
What?
Two disgruntled bastards
instead of one heroic exec.
I have a chance
with one heroic exec.
Making that stick
is the only chance
for you to win.
For the record.
the court asks the accused.
are you satisfied
with your counsel?
I'm satisfied. sir.
Court will not
reopen this question.
I understand that. sir.
I'm satisfied
with Lieutenant Greenwald.
Proceed with your case.
Commander Challee.
Call Lieutenant Keith.
State your name. rank
and present station.
Willis Keith.
US Navy Junior Grade.
assistant communications officer
on the USS   Caine.
Mr. Keith. were you
officer of the deck of the   Caine
on December 18th. 2022?
I was.
Was the captain relieved
of his command on that date?
Yes. ma'am.
Do you know why
the executive officer
relieved the captain?
Yes.
Captain Queeg
had lost control of himself
and the ship
was in grave danger
of foundering.
How many years
have you served at sea.
Lieutenant?
One year. three months.
Do you know how many years
Commander Queeg
has served at sea?
I guess about 17 years.
Which one of you is
better qualified to judge
whether a ship
is foundering or not?
Myself. ma'am.
if I'm in possession
of my faculties
and Commander Queeg isn't.
Well. what makes you think
he wasn't in possession
of his faculties?
He wasn't on the morning
of December 18th.
Oh. Have you studied
medicine or psychiatry?
No.
Did the captain foam or rave
or make insane gestures?
No. No.
What he did do was just as bad.
Clarify that. will you?
His orders were vague.
He insisted on going south
when we had a north wind
of 90 miles an hour behind us.
With a stern wind that strong.
the ship couldn't be controlled.
In your expert opinion
as ship handler. that is.
Well. Steve Maryk thought so.
and he's an expert ship handler.
Were you completely loyal
to your captain or not.
prior to 18 December?
I was. uh. antagonistic
to Captain Queeg
at certain isolated times.
At what isolated times
were you antagonistic?
When the captain
mistreated his men.
I opposed him.
When did the captain
ever mistreat his men?
Well. for one thing.
he systematically persecuted
Gunners Mate Second Class
Stilwell.
In what way?
First. he restricted him
to the ship for six months
for reading on watch.
Refused to grant him leave
when we were back in the States
in December 2021.
The man was getting
anonymous messages about
his wife's infidelity.
[stammers. sighs]
Maryk gave Stilwell
a 72-hour emergency leave.
He returned a few hours
over leave--
Hold on. Hold on.
You say that Maryk
gave Stilwell leave.
Did Maryk know that the captain
had denied Stilwell leave?
Yes.
Did Maryk check with the captain
before authorizing this leave?
No. um...
Are you testifying.
Mr. Keith.
that Maryk
deliberately violated
his captain's orders?
Uh...
I-- I mean.
i-it was my fault. actually.
'Cause I begged him to.
He was--
Mr. Keith. we now
have your testimony
that you and Stilwell
and Maryk
conspired to circumvent
an express order by
your commanding officer
a whole year
before the cyclone
of 18 December.
Now. please tell the court
any other instances
of mistreatment
that occur to you.
He cut off Internet access
for six months
'cause he wasn't invited
to a screening by mistake.
Uh. he restricted water use
in the middle of a heat wave
'cause he said the men
were using too much.
they had to be taught a lesson.
Did the captain ever issue
any rules or punishments
not permitted by regulations?
He never did anything
not allowed by regulations.
You don't like the captain.
do you. Lieutenant?
Oh. I did.
I did at first.
Very much.
Mm-hmm.
But I gradually
came to realize
that he was a petty tyrant
and utterly incompetent.
Did you think
he was insane. too?
Not until the day
of the cyclone.
Very well.
Come to the day of the storm.
Was your decision
to obey Maryk
based on your judgment that
the captain had gone mad?
Or was it based
on your hatred
of Captain Queeg?
I-- I just-- I don't remember
my state of mind at that time.
No further questions.
Mr. Keith. you stated
you disliked Captain Queeg. yes?
I did dislike him.
And did you state all
your reasons for disliking him?
Not at all.
Okay. well. please.
state the rest
of those reasons now.
Well. for one thing.
he extorted
a thousand bucks from me.
Objection.
The issue in this case
is not whether Captain Queeg
was a model officer.
but whether he was insane
on 18 December.
Defense counsel hasn't
even touched that issue.
Well. please the court.
this bears directly
on the fitness
of Captain Queeg
to command a naval vessel.
And as evidence.
it is nothing but clarification
of Keith's dislike
for his commanding officer.
a fact brought out
by trial counsel.
at great pains. I might add.
under direct examination.
The objection is overruled.
Mr. Keith.
could you please describe
this so-called extortion?
Well. this was back
last December
in Port Doha. Qatar.
Uh. the captain had this crate.
this big crate
full of duty-free whiskey
that he wanted to sneak aboard.
He appointed me boat officer.
and a working party started
to load the crate in the gig.
It was incredibly heavy.
and Captain Queeg...
got excited
and started screaming out
a whole bunch
of contradictory orders.
Sailors got rattled.
they dropped the crate
in the water.
it sank like a stone.
I was out a thousand bucks.
No. you mean the captain
was out a thousand bucks.
No. no. no. sir.
I was.
Captain informed me
it was my responsibility.
'cause I was boat officer
in charge of loading.
and he asked me
what I wanted to do about it.
I was supposed to go
on leave the next day.
My girlfriend had flown out
from New York to be with me.
so I went to the captain.
I apologized for my stupidity.
and I offered to pay
for the crate.
He took my money
and signed my leave papers.
What other reasons do you have
for disliking Captain Queeg?
Well. my chief reason
for disliking Captain Queeg
was his cowardice
in dangerous situations.
Objection!
Counsel
is originating evidence
beyond the scope
of direct examination.
He is leading the witness
to irresponsible libel
of an officer of the Navy.
Please the court.
the witness's dislike
of Captain Queeg
was not only in the scope
of direct examination.
it was the key fact
brought out.
Now. the witness has confessed
an ignorance of psychiatry.
Things Captain Queeg did
which forced the witness
in his ignorance
to dislike him
may in fact have been
the helpless acts
of a sick man.
I respectfully
urge my objection. sir.
Let me remind everyone
of the serious nature
of the issues
in this line of questioning
and the implications
involved.
From the earliest days
of our service.
the worst charge
that can be leveled against
a naval service officer.
especially
the commanding officer
of a vessel.
is that he displays cowardice
or negligence in the face
of danger to his ship or crew.
Counsel and the witness
are herewith cautioned
that they are treading on
dangerous and unprecedented
grounds here.
Court offers defense counsel
the opportunity
to withdraw his question
from the record.
My question stands. sir.
Lieutenant Keith.
you have the opportunity
to withdraw
or amend your answers.
I stand by
what I said. sir.
Very well.
Court finds that the question
is within the scope
of direct examination
and that the answer
is material.
The objection
of the trial counsel
is overruled.
Mr. Keith. can you describe
when and where
the captain displayed
this aversion to danger?
Uh. well.
I guess the worst time
was a mine-sweeping operation
in the Straits of Hormuz.
That's where
he got the nickname
Old Yellowstain.
And this nickname.
what does it imply?
Well. cowardice. of course.
It refers to a yellow dye marker
he dropped over the side.
Describe. Describe
this Yellowstain incident
for us. please.
I wasn't on
the bridge at the time.
I only heard
about it afterwards--
Oh! Objection.
Does defense counsel
seriously expect to enter these
hearsay libels on the record?
I withdraw the question.
okay?
Defense will introduce
direct evidence
on the Yellowstain incident.
Strike the question
and the answer
from the record.
Describe incidents
of cowardice
to which you were
an eyewitness.
Mr. Keith.
Any time there was
a difficult situation.
Captain Queeg was always
to be found on the side
of the bridge away from it all.
I saw that a dozen times
when I was officer of the day.
Thank you.
No further questions.
Mr. Keith.
has Lieutenant Commander Queeg
ever been investigated
or charged by higher authority
for any of this alleged
unprofessional behavior
that you describe?
No.
Can you cite
any official records
that'll substantiate
any of these fantastic
and libelous stories
that you've been telling
under the guidance
of defense counsel?
Official records. no.
Mr. Keith. do you
know for a fact
that the crate that was lost
contained smuggled liquor?
It's common knowledge.
Common knowledge.
Did you see the liquor
in the crate?
No.
Can you name one person
who will testify that they
saw liquor in the crate?
Naturally. he was pretty
careful about that.
Okay. not one person.
I just-- I don't--
I don't know who would
have actually seen it.
Mr. Keith.
you've testified
that you don't like
Captain Queeg.
You're reporting as fact
every evil rumor about him
and you're making
wildly irresponsible charges
under oath.
Isn't that the plain truth
of your testimony.
Mr. Keith?
I haven't lied once.
Mr. Keith. on the morning
that the captain was relieved.
did you really think
he'd gone crazy?
I said before.
I can't say for sure
what my state of mind was.
or his.
No more questions.
Call Captain Southard.
State your name. rank
and present station.
Randolph Southard.
Captain. US Navy
operations officer.
Fifth Fleet.
You understand
that you've been called
as an expert witness
on Avenger-class
ship handling?
I do.
State your qualifications.
Some 20 years
on smaller combatants.
ten years
of commanding all types.
including ships
ranging up to
guided missile destroyers.
To clarify for the members.
will you use the map
marked "Exhibit A"
to illustrate
the position of the   Caine
when she encountered the storm?
The   Caine
was approximately here.
The storm hit
from the northeast.
heading southwest.
Vessels of the task force
steered south
in an attempt
to outrun the weather.
The   Caine.   in her spot
on the right flank
of the sweep pattern.
caught the worst of it.
Rather than steering
with the wind aft.
she turned north
into the wind and seized.
That was the situation
in the strait
on the day in question.
Thank you. Captain.
You may be seated.
Trial counsel.
you may proceed.
Thank you.
Captain. let's say that.
hypothetically.
you're the one
who's in command
of the vessel.
A cyclone blows up
without warning
traveling west
and you're directly
in the path of it.
The wind keeps increasing.
its direction
holding steady from the north.
Soon your wind
is force ten to 12
and your seas are mountainous.
Under the circumstances.
what would you do?
Well. I'd execute
the classic Navy maneuver
known as getting
the hell out of there.
And how would you go
about that. Captain?
Well. it's almost
rule of thumb.
You say the winds
from the north are 90 knots.
center of the cyclone
coming at you from the west.
The best course is south.
You might have to head
a couple of points
one way or the other.
depending on your seas.
but there's only one way
out of that mess-- south.
But then you have
a terribly strong stern wind.
don't you?
What about it?
Well. can a small vessel
ride safely going downwind
in such conditions?
She'll ride just as well
going downwind as upwind.
In fact.
with your high freeboard
going forward.
a smaller vessel
tends to back in the wind.
Other things being equal.
she'll do slightly
better going downwind.
How about turning north
in those circumstances
and heading into the wind?
Well. that would be
dubious and dangerous.
not to mention idiotic.
Why. sir?
Well. you're heading yourself
right back into the path
of the cyclone.
Unless you're interested
in sinking.
that's not smart.
That's all. sir.
Captain. have you ever
conned a ship
at the center of a cyclone?
Negative.
Been on the fringes often.
but always managed
to avoid the center.
And have you ever commanded
a mine countermeasures ship?
Negative.
Okay. this trial. sir.
concerns an Avenger-class MCM
at the center of
a very dangerous storm.
I'm aware of that.
I've had MCMs under my command.
and I've read the book on them.
They don't differ
from smaller-class vessels
in terms of characteristics
and handling in rough weather.
I only ask these questions.
sir.
because you are
the only expert
ship-handling witness.
and I believe the extent
of your expert knowledge
should be clear to the court.
Well.
I've handled these ships
in almost
every conceivable situation
for the last ten years.
Haven't handled
a mine countermeasures
at the center of a cyclone.
but I don't know
who the hell has besides
the skipper of the   Caine.
That's
a thousand-to-one shot.
Then would you state.
without reservation.
that the same rules hold
for an MCM
at the center of a cyclone?
At the center of a cyclone.
there are no hard
and fast rules.
That's one situation
where it's all up
to the commanding officer.
Too many things
happen too fast.
Mmm.
You remember
the hypothetical question
put to you by trial counsel
about the storm. yes?
I do.
I want you to assume
in that situation
that the wind and the seas
become bigger.
They become bigger
than anything-- anything
you have ever experienced.
You have lost control
of your ship. sir.
You actually believe
she could sink.
You are in
the worst-case scenario.
Do you bring around north
into the wind.
or do you continue south.
stern to the wind?
You're getting
very extreme.
Yes. sir. I am.
Would you prefer not
to answer the question?
I'll answer it.
Please.
In the worst-case scenario.
I'd come around the north.
into the wind. if I could.
But only
in the worst-case scenario.
Why?
Because the engines
in your rudder have
the best chance that way.
That's why.
It's your last chance
to keep control of your ship.
But aren't you heading back
into the center of the storm?
First things first.
If you're on
the verge of sinking.
you about as bad off
as you can get.
Mind you. you said
worst-case scenario.
I did. sir.
Thank you very much.
No further questions.
Captain.
who. in your opinion.
is the best judge
as to whether a ship is in
the worst-case scenario?
There's only one judge.
The commanding officer.
Why. sir?
The Navy made him captain
'cause his knowledge
of the sea and of ships
is better than anyone else's
on the ship.
It's very common
for some subordinate officers
to think the ship is sinking
when all that's happening
is a little weather.
Well. don't you think. sir.
that when his subordinates
all agree that the ship
is going down
that the captain ought
to listen to them?
Negative.
Panic is a common hazard
at sea.
The highest function of command
is to override
and listen to nothing
but the voice of his own
professional judgment.
Call Dr. Joan Lundeen.
State your name. rank
and present station.
Lieutenant Commander
Joan Lundeen.
Medical Corps. US Navy.
Head of Psychiatry.
US Naval Hospital.
San Francisco.
Were you the head of
the medical board that examined
Lieutenant Commander Queeg?
I was.
And how long
did your examination last.
Doctor?
We had the commander
under constant observation
and testing for three weeks.
[Challee]
And what was the finding
of the board?
Commander Queeg was discharged
with a clean bill of health.
Doctor. is it possible
that two months ago.
on December 18th.
he was in such a state
of psychotic collapse
that relieving him
from naval command
would be justified?
No.
Is it possible
for a sane man
to perform offensive.
disagreeable.
foolish acts?
It happens every day.
We didn't find
that the commander
was a perfect officer.
Yet. you still say
that to relieve him
from naval command
because of mental illness
would be unjustified?
Completely unjustified.
Thank you.
Dr. Lundeen.
my background is legal.
not medical.
so I hope you'll bear with me
as I try to clarify
some technical terms.
Of course.
I'm going to ask some
pretty elementary questions.
All right.
Would you say Commander Queeg
is absolutely normal?
[chuckles]
Well. normality. you know.
is a fiction in psychiatry.
Mmm.
No adult is without problems
except a happy imbecile.
What are
Commander Queeg's problems?
You might say his
overall problem is one of
an inferiority complex
generated
by an unhappy childhood
and aggravated
by certain adult experiences.
Unhappy childhood
in what way?
Divorced parents.
financial trouble.
problems at school.
And the aggravating factors
in adult life?
In his adult life.
the commander is troubled
by his low standing
in his academy class
and other such factors.
but he has
become well-adjusted.
Mmm. Can you describe
the nature of that adjustment?
His identity as a naval officer
is the essential factor.
It's the key
to his personal security.
Therefore.
he has a fixed anxiety
about protecting his standing.
That would account
for his harshness.
Would he be slow
to admit mistakes?
Yes. of course.
There's nothing
unbalanced in that.
Oh. really? I mean.
would he be a perfectionist?
Such a personality
would be.
Inclined to hound
his subordinates
over the smallest
little details.
Any mistake
of a subordinate
is intolerable
because it might cause him harm.
Yet he will not admit mistakes
that he makes himself.
You might say
that he revises reality
in his own mind
so he comes out blameless.
Doctor. isn't
distortion of reality
a symptom of mental illness?
It's a question of degree.
Each one of us
has our own reality.
Yes. Doctor. but doesn't
Commander Queeg distort reality
more. say. than you do?
Yes. that's his weakness.
Other people
have other weaknesses.
It's definitely
not disabling.
Well. if he's criticized.
would he think he was
being unjustly persecuted?
It's all one pattern.
all stemming
from one basic premise
that he must try to be perfect.
Inclined to stubbornness. then.
Well. you'll have
a certain rigidity
of personality
in such an individual.
His inner insecurity
stops him from admitting
that those who differ
from him may be right.
Doctor. you just testified that
the following symptoms exist
in Commander Queeg's behavior.
We have rigidity
of personality.
We have feelings
of persecution.
We have
unreasonable suspicion.
We have withdrawal
from reality.
We have performance anxiety.
We have an unreal basic premise
and an obsessive sense
of self-righteousness.
All mild. sir.
All well-compensated.
Yes. Doctor. yes.
But is there
an inclusive psychiatric term.
one label for this syndrome?
Syndrome? Who said anything
about a syndrome?
You're misusing a term.
There's no syndrome
because there's no disease.
I'll rephrase it.
Do these symptoms
fall into
a single pattern
of neurotic disturbance.
a common psychiatric class?
I know
what you're getting at.
Well?
It's a paranoid personality.
but that is not
a disabling affliction.
Doctor--
A what personality.
Doctor?
Paranoid.
A paranoid?
Yes. paranoid.
Um. Doctor. in a--
in a paranoid personality.
like Commander Queeg's.
would he-- I'm--
I'm gonna put this to you
hypothetically.
Can a man have
a paranoid personality
that would not disable him
for subordinate duties.
but would disable him
for command?
It's conceivable.
And is the disabling factor
likely to be detected
in a personal interview?
With a skilled
psychiatrist. yes.
Why? I mean.
why is a psychiatrist needed?
Can't an educated. intelligent
person detect a paranoid?
Well. you evidently
aren't too well acquainted
with the pattern.
The distinguishing mark
of this neurosis
is the extreme plausibility
and a most convincing normal
manner on the surface.
particularly
in self-justification.
Self-justification.
Thank you. Doctor.
No further questions.
[officer] The court wishes
to clear up one point.
Doctor. is...
is such a thing possible--
Well. let me put it this way.
Let's say that a man
with a mild condition
is not disabled for all
the usual stresses of command.
Now let's say those stresses
are multiplied manifold
by an extreme emergency.
Would there then be a tendency
to make erroneous judgments?
There might be. sir.
Of course. extreme stress
does that to almost anybody.
It's not supposed to do it
to commanding officers.
No. but practically speaking.
sir. they're human.
State your name. rank
and present station.
Allen Bird. MD.
US Navy Reserve.
I was called to serve on
the psychiatric evaluation team.
Was this the board that
was headed by Dr. Lundeen
which recently inquired into
the mental health of
Lieutenant Commander Queeg?
Yes.
And what was the finding
of the board?
We found that the commander
is mentally fit
for command now
and has never been unfit.
Did you find any indication
that Commander Queeg
had what is known
as a paranoid personality?
Well. I prefer to call it
obsessive personality
with paranoid features.
Right. but this did not
indicate mental unfitness.
No.
You agree. Doctor.
that Commander Queeg
is mentally fit now
and must have been
mentally fit
on December 18th
when he was relieved
on the grounds
of mental illness?
That was
our unanimous conclusion.
Thank you. Doctor.
[Greenwald]
Dr. Bird.
do you have any special training
in psychoanalysis?
Yes.
Okay. and in psychoanalysis.
is there such a thing
as mental illness?
There are disturbed people
and adjusted people.
But those terms.
"disturbed" and "adjusted."
they correspond roughly
in layman's terms
to "sick" and "well."
as we use them.
Very roughly. yes.
Would you say
Commander Queeg suffers
from an inferiority complex?
Yes. but it's...
well-compensated.
Is there a difference
between "compensated"
and "adjusted"?
Most definitely.
Okay. could you please
describe that for us?
Well. let's say
a man is suffering
from some deep-seated
psychological disturbance.
He can compensate
by finding outlets
for his peculiar drives.
Okay. So. has Commander Queeg
ever been psychoanalyzed?
No.
He's in your terms. then.
a disturbed person?
Yes. he is.
Not disabled. however.
by the disturbance.
Okay. how is he compensated?
Mainly two ways.
The paranoid pattern.
which is useless
and not desirable.
and his naval career.
which is extremely useful
and desirable.
Yes. Doctor. have you
noticed that little thing
he does with his hands?
You mean
rolling the steel balls?
Yes.
Could you describe
that for us. please?
It's an incessant rolling
of two marbles in his hand.
Mm-hmm.
Why does he do it?
Oh. uh. his hands tremble.
He does it to still his hands
and conceal the trembling.
Why do his hands tremble?
Inner tension.
It's a surface symptom.
Doctor. you've testified
that Commander Queeg
is a disturbed.
not an adjusted person. yes?
Yes.
So he is.
in layman's terms. sick.
Yes?
I remember agreeing to the
rough resemblance of the terms
"disturbed" and "sick."
but by those terms
an awful lot of people
are sick.
Yes. Doctor. but this court
only has Commander Queeg's
sickness at issue.
If he is sick. how could
your board have given him
a clean bill of health?
Y-You're playing on words.
We found no disability.
Doctor. just suppose
for an instant
that the requirements of command
are way more severe
than you believe them to be.
Wouldn't even this mild sickness
be enough to disable him?
That's absurdly hypothetical.
because--
Oh. is it?
Have you ever had
sea duty. Doctor?
No.
No? How long have you been
in the service of the Navy?
Five months.
Five months?
Five--
Six months.
Six. I guess now.
Six months in the service
of the Navy.
Have you ever had any dealings
with ships' captains
prior to this case?
No.
No?
Then on what do you base
your estimate
of the requirements of command?
My general knowledge.
Would you say it takes somebody.
a person of exceptional ability.
highly gifted. highly skilled
to be a commander
of a naval vessel?
No.
No. Really?
Not highly gifted. no.
Then what?
Uh. reasonable responses.
"Reasonable"?
Uh. fairly good
intelligence.
"Fairly good"?
Sufficient training
and experience. but--
Is this enough equipment.
say. for a highly skilled
psychiatrist?
Not exactly.
So in other words.
it takes more ability
to be a psychiatrist
than it does to be
the commander of
a US naval vessel.
It takes-- That is.
uh. different abilities
are required.
You're making the comparison.
not I.
No. Doctor. you're the one
that said you don't think
Commander Queeg's sickness
should disable him for command.
I am suggesting that since
you evidently know little about
the requirements of command.
that you may be wrong
in your conclusion.
Well. I reject
your suggestion.
Oh. you do? Why?
Because you've deliberately
substituted the word "sick."
which is a loose--
a polarizing--
Have I?
A what word. Doctor?
Polarizing.
A polarizing word.
I never said "sick."
My grasp of the requirements
of command is adequate.
or I would have
disqualified myself
from serving on the board.
Maybe you should
have disqualified yourself.
Objection!
The witness is being badgered!
I withdraw
my last statement.
No further questions.
Doctor. the defense counsel
has managed to put
words into your mouth
that I'm certain
you don't mean.
I'm not aware that
he succeeded in putting
any words into my mouth.
Doctor. he drew
the implication from you
that Captain Queeg is sick.
Surely you don't--
I'm careful in my use
of terminology.
I did not use the term "sick."
Captain Queeg is definitely
not disabled for command.
which is the only issue here.
Prosecution rests.
Defense.
present your case.
I call the accused.
Does the accused request that
he be permitted to testify?
Yes. sir.
You have the right
not to take the stand.
If you don't take the stand.
that fact won't be
to your prejudice.
If you take the stand.
you may be subjected to
a rigorous cross-examination.
I understand that.
sir.
You may take the stand.
State your name. rank
and present position.
Steven Maryk.
Lieutenant. US Navy.
executive officer
of the USS   Caine.
Are you the accused
in this court-martial?
Yes. I am.
What was your occupation
in civilian life?
Helping my father
in his fishing business.
We own a couple boats.
Where?
San Francisco.
Then you were familiar
with the problems
of ocean-going ship handling
prior to joining the Navy?
Yes. I've been on boats
since I was 14.
Did you relieve
the commander of the USS   Caine
18th December. 2022?
Yes. I did.
Was the   Caine   in trouble
when you relieved its captain?
Yes. it was.
And on what facts
do you base that judgment?
Well. several things.
We couldn't hold course.
We broached three times
in an hour.
"Broached"?
Yes. wind and sea took charge
and tossed us sideways
ten minutes at a time.
We were rolling too steeply
for the inclinometer to record.
We were shipping water
out of the wheelhouse.
The generators were cutting out.
The ship was not responding
to emergency rudder
and engine settings.
We were lost
and out of control.
And did you inform
your captain of this?
Yes.
Repeatedly for an hour.
I begged him
to come north into the wind.
What was his reply?
Well. mostly
just a glazed look
and no answer.
Mr. Maryk.
when did you start
keeping your medical log
on Commander Queeg?
Shortly after the incident
with the mines
in the Straits of Hormuz.
And why did you start it?
I began to think the captain
might be mentally ill.
Why?
Because of the yellow
dye marker business.
You mean the incident
where the commander acquired
the nickname Old Yellowstain?
Yes.
Were you an eyewitness
to this occurrence?
I was navigator.
I was right there
on the bridge.
Please describe
this Yellowstain incident.
It was the third day
of an assigned sweep
with two other MCMs.
Mm-hmm.
We had detected
a field of acoustic mines.
[speaking louder]
It was the third day
of an assigned sweep
with two other MCMs.
We detected a field
of acoustic mines
in the narrowest part
of the strait
and we'd been ordered
to destroy them in place
using high explosives.
And that's delicate business.
It's gotta be done just right.
We milled around out there
for a while.
Then the captain decided
not to set the charges.
He gave us some excuse
about faulty equipment.
I checked the gear.
It was in perfect working order.
And the captain
wouldn't hear it.
He said the tech was incompetent
and he knew better.
So we dropped
a yellow dye marker
over the side.
radioed to the other MCM
to destroy the mines.
They radioed back
to slow down. but we just--
we steamed right out of there.
[Greenwald] "Steamed."
Now. Mr. Maryk--
The court wishes to
question the witness.
Lieutenant. you say
the gear was in working order.
Did you check it personally?
Yes. sir. along with
the chief electronic tech
and the sonar men.
It was fine.
There was absolutely
nothing wrong with the gear.
And after you steamed away.
was there any danger
due to shock waves
from the underwater
detonations?
No.
No. there was not.
MCMs are designed to
withstand that kind of thing.
We do this all the time.
Now. you say these boats
signaled to you
to slow down.
Yes. sir.
Was the signal reported
to your captain?
I reported it to him myself.
Was he aware that
he was steaming away
from his assigned spot
in the sweep formation?
It was obvious to
everyone on the bridge.
I pointed it out.
I said we were breaking
the sweep pattern.
that the other vessels
would not know
where we'd found the mines.
And that is when he said.
"We'll drop a yellow dye marker
over the side then."
You may continue.
Mr. Maryk. why didn't
you go immediately
to a higher authority
with your doubts
about Captain Queeg's
mental health?
I felt if I had a record.
I'd be on stronger ground.
That's when I decided
to keep the medical log.
If I was wrong.
I'd just burn it.
I kept it under lock and key.
And what.
in your opinion.
made an incident worthy
of keeping a record
in the medical log?
Any act that seemed
abnormal or strange.
Like what?
Like the coffee machine.
The coffee machine
business?
Yes.
Well. please describe
the coffee machine thing.
We had a new coffee machine
in the wardroom.
And. uh. Captain
really liked his coffee.
But you had to be careful.
You couldn't leave it
plugged in too long
or the thing would burn out.
That's exactly what happened.
One of the guys assigned
to the wardroom mess duty
forgot to unplug it
and the thing was--
it was just fried.
And none of them would admit
which one had done it.
So the captain ordered
all the officers of the ship
to sit as a trial of inquiry
to find out who'd burned out
the coffee machine.
Which-- Look. in itself.
it's a silly thing.
But this went on
for 36 hours.
[Greenwald whistles]
[Maryk]
All ship's work suspended.
And there we are. all of us.
we're in the wardroom.
We're dying for sleep.
we need showers.
and we're trying to figure out
which one of these poor bastards
burned out the coffee machine.
And they're so scared.
they think whoever did it
is gonna get shot.
They'd have sooner died
before they told us.
And so. finally.
I go to the captain
and I say all the officers
will admit that they're
incompetent investigators
and take the hit
on their fitness reports.
but we can't find out
who left the coffee machine
plugged in for too long.
And so he makes a mark
in his black book
and he calls off the inquiry.
It's things like that.
Or the water business.
The water business.
Yes.
Please describe
that water business.
Look. it's all in the log.
I know. but please describe
the water business.
The captain
restricted water use
from the entire crew
for two days
in the middle
of a dust storm
because he caught
one of the deck gang
taking a shower.
Or it's plain crazy things.
Cheese business.
The cheese business.
The strawberry-- Yes.
Cheese business?
I don't recall
any cheese business.
This was on the first ship
the captain was assigned to.
sir. as an ensign.
Cheese was going missing
from the ship's stores.
And the captain investigated
and he caught a sailor
who'd made a duplicate key
to the padlock
to the refrigerator.
Now. for catching
this cheese thief.
he was given a letter
of commendation.
This is during peacetime.
so naturally
he's pretty proud of the thing.
So when the strawberry stuff
started. he insisted
it was the same thing.
And all we had to do
was find the guy
who had made a duplicate key
to the wardroom fridge.
But of course
that's ridiculous.
It was one of the guys assigned
to the wardroom mess again.
We all knew that they'd eaten
this quart of strawberries.
It was left over
from the wardroom mess.
They were entitled to it.
That was the custom.
But when the captain
started to freak out
about those strawberries.
they froze up.
said they didn't
know who'd eaten them.
And the captain's
so hot on his theory
he believes them.
So he ordered the search
for the key.
Yes. sir.
We have never seen Captain Queeg
so happy before or since.
He's living the cheese business
all over again.
He organized the search himself.
We collected every key
on that ship.
We had just boxes--
barrels of keys.
That's about 2.800 of them
all told.
each tagged
with the owner's name.
And just to be safe.
we searched that ship
from stem to stern.
from the radar mast
to the bilge.
We stripped the crew naked.
[Greenwald]
Naked?
Yes. sir. Naked.
Each one of them lined up.
stark naked.
and we shook out their clothes.
We searched their lockers.
We searched every hole.
every place on that ship.
We crawled under the bilge
and pulled out
the lead ballast blocks
that are 200 pounds apiece.
This went on for three days.
[Greenwald]
Three days?
[Maryk] Yes. sir.
All in the name of a key
that never existed.
So. when I saw the captain
sitting by the fridge.
pulling keys one by one
from a barrel
and trying them in a padlock
for hours on end
with a gleam in his eye.
I gave up.
And that is when
I showed the medical log
to Lieutenant Keefer.
Mr. Maryk.
when Lieutenant Keefer
finished reading
your medical log.
what was
his first comment?
Sir. I don't remember.
Did he encourage you
to go to Admiral Williams?
No. sir.
I did that on my own.
But he went with you
to the flagship.
Yes. sir.
So. at first.
he didn't discourage you?
Once we were
aboard the flagship.
he discouraged me
and said we shouldn't
go through it and we didn't.
Would you say his testimony
on the subject was
substantially correct?
Yes. sir.
This was all my doing. sir.
Continue your examination.
Mr. Maryk.
when the cyclone was over.
did Commander Queeg
make an attempt
to regain command?
Yes.
On the morning of the 19th.
after the storm had blown out.
What happened?
Well. I was in the chart house
writing up a dispatch.
And?
I was reporting the relief
to Admiral Williams.
And?
Captain Queeg came and asked
if I would go to his cabin
and speak to him
before I sent the dispatch.
So I went below
and we talked.
And what happened?
It was the same as before.
uh. at first.
He said I'd be
court-martialed for mutiny.
And then he went
on this long thing about
how much he loved the Navy.
that he has no other interests.
and even if
he was cleared of this
that his record would be ruined.
And I told him
I felt sorry for him.
And I-- I really did.
And that's when
he came out with
his proposal.
Which?
He said he wouldn't
write me up and report me.
that he would resume
command of the ship
and that the whole thing would
be written off and forgotten.
And what was your reply
to his proposal?
I was amazed.
I said. Captain.
the whole ship knows about it.
[Greenwald] Yes.
It's written up
in the quartermaster's log.
in the officer
of the deck's log.
And. uh--
And he hemmed and hawed.
[Greenwald]
And?
What happened next?
Finally. he said
it wouldn't be
the first time
that a rough log
had been corrected
and fixed up after the fact.
Did you remind him
that the alteration of logs
is strictly forbidden?
Yes. I did.
And he kind of laughed.
He said it was either that
or a court-martial
for mutiny for me
and a black mark
on his record which he felt
he did not deserve.
And what followed?
He begged and he pleaded.
And. uh. at one point he cried
and eventually got very angry
and he ordered me out
of his cabin.
That is when
I sent the dispatch.
Then you had the opportunity.
less than 24 hours later.
to expunge this whole event
from the official records
with your captain's
knowledge and approval.
Yes. sir.
Mr. Maryk.
were you panicky at all
during the storm?
No. I was not.
Lieutenant. you are charged
with relieving
your captain willfully.
without authority
and without justifiable cause.
Did you relieve
Commander Queeg willfully?
Yes.
I knew what I was doing.
Did you relieve him
without authority?
No. my authority is Chapter 11
of Navy Regulations.
Did you relieve
without justifiable cause?
No.
My justifiable cause was
the captain's mental breakdown
at a time when the ship
was in danger.
Thank you.
No further questions.
Mr. Maryk.
this amazing interview
in which the captain offered
to falsify official records.
were there
any witnesses to it?
We were alone in his cabin.
No.
This incident with the mines.
Did anyone else
see these records?
Which. according to you.
indicated that the   Caine
had departed
her assigned sweep formation?
Was there anything
in the records
of the ship's movements
that would verify
that departure?
Well. about an hour
after it happened.
the captain asked
to see the chart.
he took it to his cabin.
and when I got the log back.
there was no mention
of the incident.
Right. Then you have
no corroboration
of this story.
No.
[clears throat]
Mr. Maryk. who coined
the nickname Old Yellowstain?
That just sprung
into existence.
Throughout the ship
or just among
the officers?
Just among the officers.
You sure you didn't
coin it yourself?
I didn't.
What kind of rating
would you give yourself
for loyalty to your captain?
I'd say
I was a loyal officer.
Did you issue
a 72-hour liberty
to Petty Officer Stilwell
in December
against your captain's
express instructions?
Yes.
You call that
a loyal act?
No.
Then you admit to
a disloyal act
in your first days
as executive officer.
Yes.
Mr. Maryk. where did you
get your schooling?
Public schools.
San Francisco.
Okay.
And San Francisco
State University.
And how were your grades
in elementary school?
[scoffs]
They were okay.
Average? Above average?
Below average?
Average.
How about your
high school grades?
Well. I didn't do
so good there.
Uh. below average.
What kind of courses
did you take in college?
Business courses.
Any pre-medical courses?
No.
Any psychology?
Any psychiatry courses?
No.
How were your grades
in college?
They--
I got by.
Below average?
[Maryk]
Yes.
[Challee] Where did you
get these ideas
about paranoia?
Prob-- Well. books.
And. uh... [clears throat]
...a lot of research online.
Books? What books?
Name the titles.
Which websites?
They're medical type books
about mental illness.
and I-I don't remember
the exact names of the sites.
Oh. Was this
your intellectual hobby.
reading about psychiatry?
No.
Well. then where did
you get these books?
Fr-- I borrowed them
from. uh. ships' doctors
here and there.
[chuckles]
And with your background.
your scholastic record.
you imagine that you understood
these highly technical
and scientific works?
I got something out of them.
What is
a conditioned reflex?
I don't know.
What is schizophrenia?
Uh. I think it's--
it's a mental illness.
You think so?
Yes.
What are its symptoms?
I don't know.
In fact. you don't know
what you're talking about
when you discuss mental illness.
Is that right?
Well. you know. I never said
I knew much about it.
[chuckles]
Have you ever heard
the expression
that a little learning
is a dangerous thing?
Yes.
You had a head full of terms
you didn't understand.
and on that basis
felt you had the right
to depose
a commanding officer
on the grounds
of mental illness.
Is that right?
I didn't relieve Captain Queeg
because what the book said.
I relieved him because the ship
was in danger of sinking.
No. never mind the ship.
We are discussing
your grasp of psychiatry.
Mm-hmm.
Did you hear the diagnosis
of the qualified psychiatrist
who examined your captain?
Yes.
And what was
their diagnosis?
Was he crazy or wasn't he
on December 18th?
They say he wasn't.
But you.
with your whining gripes
of strawberries
and coffee makers.
know better.
Mr. Maryk. who was
the third ranking officer
on your ship?
Lieutenant Keefer.
Was he
a good officer?
Yes.
Do you consider his mind
as good as yours?
Yes. Uh. better.
Better.
Did you show
your medical log to him?
Yes.
Was he convinced by it
that the captain
was mentally ill?
No.
He talked to you
out of trying to have
the captain relieved.
Yes.
And yet two weeks later.
despite the whole weight
of naval discipline.
despite the arguments
of the next officer
in rank to you.
a superior intellect.
despite all this.
you went ahead
and seized command
of your ship?
I relieved Captain Queeg
because he definitely
seemed sick
on the morning
of the cyclone.
You still believe
that your diagnosis
of Captain Queeg
is superior
to the doctors'?
J-- O-Only about Queeg
on the morning
of the cyclone.
No more questions.
No re-examination.
You may step down.
Lieutenant.
Call
Lieutenant Commander Queeg.
Commander. you are reminded
that you are still under oath.
Yes. sir.
Be seated.
Commander. on the morning
of the 19th December.
did you have an interview
in your room
with Lieutenant Maryk?
Well. let's see.
The 19th.
the day after the storm.
Yes. Yes. I did.
Was the interview
at your request?
Yes.
What was the substance
of the interview?
Well. as I say.
I felt sorry for him.
Hated to see him
ruining his life
over one panicky mistake.
particularly knowing
that it was his ambition
to make the Navy a career.
I tried as hard as I could
to show him
what a mistake he had made.
suggested
he relinquish command
back to me
and offered to be
as lenient as possible
when reporting
what had happened.
You never offered
not to report the incident?
How could I?
It had already been
recorded in the logs.
Yes.
Those logs.
were they handwritten.
typed. or what?
It wouldn't have
made a difference.
Were they handwritten.
Commander?
Well. probably.
Quartermasters log. OOD.
Rough logs
are usually handwritten.
I can't imagine
that the yeoman had time
to type out smooth logs.
given all the excitement.
Did you offer
to alter the logs
and not report the incident?
No. I did not.
Alterations are not permitted.
Lieutenant Maryk
testified under oath.
Commander.
that you made
such an offer.
Not only that. but you
begged and pleaded with him
to alter the logs.
in return for which
you promised to hush up
the story completely
and make no report.
Well. that's just
not the truth.
There isn't any truth
in it at all?
It's a complete distortion
of what I've said.
My version is the exact truth.
You deny the proposal
to alter the logs
and hush up the story.
Yes. I deny it completely.
Th-That's the part
that he's made up.
the crying and the pleading.
It's fantastic.
You're accusing Mr. Maryk
of perjury.
I-I'm not accusing him--
[laughs]
He's accused of enough
as it stands.
I'm just saying you'll hear
a lot of strange things
about me from Maryk.
Th-That's all I'm saying.
Isn't it obvious. Commander.
that one of you is not telling
the truth about this meeting?
Well. it appears so.
Can you prove that
it isn't you?
Only by citing
a clean record of 21 years
as a naval officer
over the word of
a man standing trial
for a mutinous act.
Commander. did you ever
receive $1.000 from
Lieutenant Junior Grade Keith?
Uh. I don't recall offhand.
He testified you did.
I did?
On what occasion?
On the occasion of the loss
of a crate of yours
in the Port of Oman.
Oh. y-yes. Okay.
[chuckling] I remember that.
That's over a year ago.
December thereabouts.
He was responsible
for the loss.
Well. insisted
on paying for it.
a-a-and so he did.
And what was in this crate
that cost $1.000?
Well. uniforms. books.
n-navigating instruments.
the usual things.
How was Keith responsible?
Well. he was the boat officer.
He was responsible for loading.
He issued foolish.
contradictory orders
that rattled the men.
They dropped the crate
into the water and it sank.
A wooden crate.
full of clothes. sank.
It had other things in it.
Souvenir coral rocks.
for example.
[chuckles]
Commander. wasn't the--
the crate entirely full
of bottles of booze?
Certainly not.
Lieutenant Keith testified
that he paid you $1.000
for a crate full of liquor.
Well. you'll hear a lot of
strange distortions from Keith.
A-And from Maryk.
They're the two culprits here.
They're apt to make all kinds
of strange statements.
You make this crate
yourself?
No. a man
from the engine room did.
What's his name?
I don't recall. It'll be
in the personnel records.
He's been gone from the ship
for quite some time.
Okay. where is he now?
Uh. I-I don't know.
Because you don't know
what his name is?
No.
Was it Engineman Second Class
Otis F. Langhorn. sir?
L... Langhorn?
Yes.
Langhorn. yeah.
Well. th-that
sounds about right.
There's an Otis F. Langhorn.
engineman first class.
in transit right now.
Defense has arranged to
subpoena him if necessary.
Are you sure
it's the same one?
Well. it says 20 months
aboard the   Caine.
It's got your signature upon it.
Would it be useful
to have him called. sir?
Objection
to this entire irrelevancy
about the crate
and request it be stricken
from the record.
The witness's credibility
is being established.
I put it to the court. sir.
that nothing could be
more relevant to this trial.
Overruled.
Court stenographer
will repeat the question.
[stenographer]
"Would it be useful to
have him subpoenaed. sir?"
Well. the real question is.
which crate
did Langhorn nail up?
I-I now recall
having two crates.
Oh. well.
this is new information
not mentioned by Keith.
Did Langhorn nail up
both crates. sir?
I-I can't-- I can't recall
if I had two crates
on th-that occasion
or two crates
on two separate occasions.
It's been a long time
and I've had a strenuous year
of command from ports of storm.
I-- I just--
I can't be clear.
Commander.
there are a number of issues
in this trial
which turn on
the issue of credibility
between yourself
and other officers.
If you wish.
I can request a quick
little five-minute recess
while you clear your mind
as best you can about
the matter of this crate.
No. no. that won't be necessary.
Just give me some time to think.
Please.
Uh...
Um...
Ah. o-okay.
I-I've got it straight now.
Mm-hmm.
I misspoke.
Uh. San Diego. 2014.
I lost a crate
in similar circumstances.
That was the crate
with the clothes in it
and the crate that Keith lost
did contain liquor.
Entirely full of liquor.
Well. I suppose so.
You transported this
on your ship.
You are aware of
Navy Regulations. sir.
Of course I'm aware
of regulations.
Th-The crate was sealed
before I got under way.
I gave it
the same locked stowage
that I did
the medicinal brandy.
three years' steady duty.
I gave myself this leeway
as the captain of the   Caine.
which was a common practice.
I do believe that rank
has its privileges.
as they say. and. well. uh--
I-I didn't mean to
conceal it from the court.
It's not something
I'm ashamed of.
I just got the two crates
mixed up in my mind.
Lieutenant Maryk
also testified. sir.
that you gave
all the orders
to the boat crew
which resulted
in the loss of the crate.
[chuckles]
Well. that's a lie.
And that you refused
to sign his leave papers
until he paid you for that loss.
[Queeg]
And that is another lie.
Commander. during the period
when the   Caine
was sweeping for mines
off the Straits of Hormuz.
did you steam over
and cut your own tow line?
[Challee]
Objection!
This tow line business
is the last straw.
The tactics
of the defense counsel
are an outrage
on the dignity
of these proceedings.
He is systematically
turning this trial
into a court-martial
of Commander Queeg.
[Greenwald]
Please the court.
the trial counsel believes
she has a prima facie case
based on the report
of two psychiatrists.
Now. I believe it is
up to the court
and not
two shore-bound doctors.
however brilliant.
to decide whether
the captain of the   Caine
was mentally well enough
to retain his self-control
and his post during a cyclone.
The objection is overruled.
The witness
will answer the question.
Okay. well. here's the story
on that particular slander.
Stilwell
was a-a-at the helm.
a dreamy. unreliable man
who failed to warn me
that we were coming around
the full 360 degrees.
I was the one who recognized
what was happening.
reversed course immediately.
We did not go over the tow line.
I-It parted in the tight turn.
Weren't you reprimanding
a petty officer named Urban
at length
for having his shirttail out
while your ship was
turning 360 degrees. sir?
Who told you that?
Keith again?
Answer the question. please.
It's a malicious lie.
of course.
Was Urban on the bridge?
Yes.
Was his shirttail out?
Yes. and I reprimanded him.
Took all of two seconds.
It's not like I dwell
on these sort of things.
But now that you've brought
the shirttail thing up.
I'd like to point out
that Ensign Keith.
a department head.
was responsible
for enforcing
uniform regulations
and completely screwed
the whole job up.
When I took over the ship.
it was like some
third-world navy.
and I bored down on Keith
to look out for things
like shirttails.
And. well. maybe
that's one of the reasons
that he hates me so much
and insists on circulating
this nonsense about me
cutting the tow line.
Did you drop a yellow dye marker
off the Straits of Hormuz?
No. I. uh-- Maybe.
I-I don't recall.
Do you recall
what your first mission was?
Well. uh. to detect
and destroy mines
in the Straits of Hormuz.
And did you fulfill
that mission?
Yes.
So why did you drop
the dye marker?
I'm not saying that I did.
But if I had.
it would have been to mark
a mine that we had detected.
Commander.
didn't you drop the marker
and retire at high speed.
taking the   Caine
out of its assigned
sweep pattern?
Now. didn't you do this
to avoid contact with
a dangerous underwater mine
and leave it
for another ship
to handle?
The question is abusive
and flagrantly leading.
I withdraw my last question
on account of
the witness's dim memory.
I'll proceed
to more recent events.
[officer] Court desires
to question the witness.
Commander Queeg.
in view of the implications
in this line of testimony.
I urge you
to search your memory
for correct answers.
Well. I certainly
am trying. sir.
These are very fine points.
and I've had a number of arduous
missions since that storm.
And th-then there's.
well. all of this business.
I appreciate that.
But it will facilitate justice
if you can remember enough
to give a few definite answers
on points of fact.
First of all. did you depart
your assigned sector
due to equipment problems?
Yes. Yes.
Okay-- Okay. I-I remember.
Yes.
that was the case here.
So you departed the pattern
rather than try to repair
or troubleshoot the equipment?
But... [scoffs]
...an active mine
had been detected.
Is that why you dropped
the dye marker?
There was a safety factor.
Uh. it didn't make sense to me
to try and detonate mines
using defective gear.
But I wanted every vessel
in the area to know exactly
where that mine was.
s-so I marked it.
Now. if I erred on the side
of being overcautious.
well. I-I'm sorry.
But then again. sir.
I don't think you can err
on the side of safety.
Did you have the conn?
Well. no.
A-As I recall.
Maryk was on the conn.
And I also recall
warning him not to stray
too far out of formation.
But we did need to leave room
for other ships to come in
and deal with that mine.
Well. how much room?
I don't remember exactly.
I-I just know that
we had strayed outside
of our assigned sector.
and then. well.
I pulled him aside
and admonished him.
Didn't you direct him
to return to station
immediately?
Sir. everything
was happening very fast.
We had to mark the area
and then get out of there
and make room for other ships
to come into the area.
as I said.
These are your factual
recollections. Commander?
Those are the facts. sir.
Resume your examination.
Commander.
did you make it a practice
to retire to your room
during minesweeping operations?
Well. that's
an insulting question.
The answer is no.
I had to be on
every side of that bridge
at all times.
I-I had Maryk as a navigator
and Keith as an officer of
the deck at general quarters.
Invariably. they'd squirrel
over to the same side
of the bridge
and I'd have to be captain.
navigator and officer of
the deck all rolled up into one.
That's why I had to go
from one side of the bridge
to the other all the time.
And that's the truth.
I don't care how many damn lies
have been told about me
in this courtroom.
The court
will question the witness.
Sir. the witness
is obviously and understandably
agitated by this ordeal
and I request a recess
to give him
a breathing space.
I'm not agitated
in the least.
I'm glad to answer
any and all questions.
[marbles clacking]
In fact.
I-I demand the opportunity
to set the record straight
for any derogatory statements
made about me in testimony
that's gone before.
I didn't make a single mistake
in the 15 months
I was aboard the   Caine.
and I-I can prove it.
I've had a spotless record
up until now
and I don't want it
being discredited
by these lies and distortions
told by these disloyal officers.
Commander.
would you like a recess?
Certainly not.
In fact. if I had
any say in this.
I would ask
there be no recess.
[marbles continue clacking]
[officer]
Very well.
I simply want to ask.
if the performance
of these two officers
was so unspeakably bad.
why did you tolerate it?
Why didn't you beach them
or rotate them
out of your command?
Well. this is gonna sound
strange to you. sir. but.
well. the truth is
I'm-I'm a softhearted man
and not many people
know that.
But I wanted to keep
them under-- under eye
to try and train them up.
make them good officers.
L-Last thing I wanted to do
was wreck their careers.
A concern they certainly
didn't share for me.
E-Either one of them.
Commander. on the morning
of the 18th of December.
the exact moment
you were relieved of command.
was the   Caine
in the last extremity?
Certainly not.
Was it in grave danger
at that moment?
Absolutely not.
I was in complete control
of the ship.
And did you inform
any of your other officers
of your intention
to change course.
come north at ten o'clock.
15 minutes
after Lieutenant Maryk
relieved you of command?
Yes. yes.
I made that statement
and that was my intention.
Then Lieutenant Maryk's decision
to come north was not
a panicky. irrational blunder.
His panicky blunder
was relieving me.
I kept him from making
any disastrous mistakes
thereafter.
I wasn't trying
to vindicate myself.
Commander. have you seen
Lieutenant Maryk's medical log?
Yes. [chuckles]
Yes. I've read
that interesting document.
Yes. sir. I have.
Biggest conglomeration
of lies and distortions
and half-truths
I've ever seen.
But I'm extremely glad
that you've asked
'cause I wanna
get my side of it
all on the record.
Please.
Please give us your version
of any comments
factually related
to episodes in the log.
Okay. well.
starting right with
that strawberry business.
The real truth
is that I was betrayed.
d-double-crossed
by my executive officer
and this precious gentleman.
Mr. Keith.
who between them
corrupted my wardroom
so I was one man
against the whole ship.
No support
from my officers. okay?
[chuckles] Now. you take
that strawberry business.
Why. if that wasn't a case of
outright conspiracy to protect
a malefactor from justice.
Maryk carefully leaves out
the little fact
that I had conclusively proved
by a process of elimination
that someone
had a key to the fridge.
Now. he says the messmen
ate the strawberries.
But if I wanted
to take the trouble.
I could prove to this court
categorically
that they couldn't have.
I-It's the water business
all over again.
Like when the crew
was taking showers
seven times a day
and I tried to initiate
the simplest principles
of water conservation.
But. oh. no. Mr. Maryk.
the hero of the crew.
wanted to go right on
coddling them.
Well. you take
that coffee business.
Well-- No.
[laughs]
No. Excuse me.
Sorry. sir.
Strawberry thing first.
Okay.
Everything hinged
on a thorough search
for the key.
and that's when Maryk
and. as usual. with help
from Mr. Keith. fudged it.
Went through
a lot of phony motions.
didn't prove anything.
Like thinking
that the burning out
of the coffee makers.
which were government property.
was some kind of joke.
And that was
the attitude of everybody
from Maryk on down.
No-- No sense
of responsibility.
And I kept emphasizing
over and over
that all of these things
were gonna have to be
accounted for.
[groans]
It was a constant battle.
Always--
Always the same thing.
Maryk and Keith
undermining my authority.
always arguing.
Now. I wanted--
I wanted to train Keith up
to be a good officer.
but I was stabbed
in the back by--
Well...
[chuckles]
Well. I-- I think I've covered
that strawberry business.
And. oh. yes.
the mess account business.
Well. I had to
watch them like a hawk.
and believe me. I did.
[chuckles] Didn't sneak
any fast ones by me.
It wasn't for
a lack of trying.
Instead of paying attention
to their accounts
and their inventories.
which I would have to go
over again and again--
Always a few pennies short
or a couple dollars over.
But what do they care about
keeping accurate records?
Let the captain worry about it.
Well. by God. I did.
I-I defy anyone to find
a single wardroom mess statement
or ship service inventory
filed aboard the USS   Caine
while I was captain
that had a mistake
of a single. solitary cent.
And by that. I mean. I defy
a certified public accountant
to do it. Okay?
Well. what else?
[muttering]
There's so much bullshit
in that precious log
of Mr. Maryk's.
Oh. yes! [laughs]
Th-The movie business.
Okay.
no respect for command.
Th-That was the whole trouble
with that ship.
The movie operator. who had
a disrespectful manner anyways.
started the movie
without waiting for the arrival
of the commanding officer.
Out of that whole ship's crew.
officers and men.
did one person stand up
and call a halt or even notice
that the captain wasn't present?
I missed those movies
more than they did.
I banned them.
and. by God. I'd do it again.
Wh-What was I supposed to do.
start issuing them all
letters of commendation
for this gratuitous insult
to the commanding officer?
[laughs]
It's not like
I took it personal.
Uh. it's the principle.
The principle of respect
for the command.
That principle was dead
when I came aboard that ship
and I brought it to life.
And I nagged and I bitched
and I hollered.
and. by God. I made it stick
while I was captain!
Uh. and as I-- as I say.
it wasn't
just the coffee makers.
It was a matter of respect.
When I ask a sailor a question.
I want a straight answer.
Nobody's gonna get away
with this shifty evasion.
if I have to hold
a court of inquiry
for a week.
What do I care
about strawberries?
It's a question of principle.
Stealing is stealing.
And on my ship--
Well. it's not like we got
a lot of nice treats anyway.
Uh... if we ever did
get something pleasant
once in a blue moon.
like--
like strawberries. well.
it was outrageous that
I couldn't have a second helping
if I felt like it.
I wasn't gonna let them
get away with it. and I didn't.
By God. I never
let anything like that
happen on that ship again!
[mutters]
As I say. I--
Okay. um...
H-How many of these things
have I covered?
I-- I can only roughly
do this by memory.
If you ask me
specific questions.
I'll--
I'll tackle those
one by one by one.
That won't be necessary. sir.
That was very thorough.
Thank you.
I draw
the court's attention
to Exhibit 12.
Commander. I show you
an authenticated copy
of a fitness report
that you wrote
for Lieutenant Maryk
July 1. 2022.
Do you recognize it
as such?
Y-Yes.
And by this time
had the following events
occurred--
the water shortage.
the coffee maker
investigation.
the banning of the movies.
the Internet
and other events?
Yes. I believe so.
Please read your comments
on Lieutenant Maryk. July 1.
Well. n-not being vindictive.
I-I don't write down
every single. solitary instance.
A fitness report
goes into a man's record.
and. well. I've always
tried to go easy on them.
A-Always have. always will.
I appreciate that. sir.
Please read the comments.
"This officer has.
if anything.
improved in
his performance of duty
since the last fitness report.
He is consistently loyal.
unflagging.
thorough. courageous
and efficient.
He is considered at present
fully qualified for command
of a 1.200-ton MCM.
His professional determination
and integrity set him apart
as an outstanding example
for other officers.
reserve and regular alike.
He cannot be
too highly commended."
Thank you.
No further questions.
No cross-examination.
You're excused.
Commander.
Yes. sir.
Defense rests.
Is the trial counsel
ready for summation?
No summary. sir.
Prosecution rests.
No argument at all?
If it please
the court.
I'm-- I'm at a loss
to discuss the case
the defense has presented.
I have nothing to refute.
It's no case at all.
It has nothing to do
with the charge
or the specification.
The defense counsel's
very first question
in this trial
was. "Commander. have you
ever heard the expression.
Old Yellowstain?"
That was the key
to his entire strategy.
which was simply to twist
the proceedings around
so that the accused
would become not Maryk.
but Commander Queeg.
He has dragged out
every possible vicious
and malicious criticism
of the commander
from the other witnesses
and forced Captain Queeg
to defend himself against them
in open court.
on the spur of the moment.
without advice of counsel.
without any
of the normal privileges
and safeguards
of an accused man
under naval law.
Can this court possibly
endorse the precedent
that a captain who doesn't
please his underlings
can be deposed by them?
And then that the captain's
only recourse afterward
is to be placed
at a witness stand
in a general court-martial
to answer
every petty gripe
and justify
all his command decisions
to a hostile lawyer
taking the part of
his insubordinate inferiors?
Such a precedent is nothing
but a blank check for mutiny.
It is the absolute destruction
of the chain of command.
However.
all this doesn't worry me.
I am confident
that this court
hasn't been impressed
by such aggressive tactics.
I know that the court
is going to reject
this cynical play
on its emotions.
this... insult
to its intelligence.
and find the specification
proven by the facts.
I've only this to say.
Whatever the verdict
on the accused. I--
I formally recommend
that Defense Counsel Greenwald
be censured by this court
for conduct unbecoming
an officer of the Navy
and that this reprimand
be made part of his record.
Defense counsel.
Closing argument?
Please the court.
I undertook
the defense of the accused
very reluctantly
and only at the urging of
the judge advocate that no other
defense counsel was available.
I was reluctant
because I knew
that the only possible
form of defense
was to prove
the mental incompetence
of an officer of the Navy.
It has been
the most unpleasant duty
I have ever had to perform.
However.
once having undertaken it.
I have done my best
to win an acquittal.
I thought this was my duty.
both as defense counsel
appointed by the Navy
and as a member of the bar.
Let me make one thing clear.
It is not the contention
of the defense
that Commander Queeg
is a coward
and that therefore.
if he commits questionable acts
under intense fire.
the explanation
must lie elsewhere.
The court saw
Commander Queeg's bearing
on the stand.
The court can imagine
what his bearing
must have been like
at the height
of the storm.
And on that basis.
the court can decide
the fate of the accused.
[exhales]
Before recessing.
the court will rule
on the recommendation
to censure you.
Yes. sir.
This has been a strange
and tragic trial.
In the 248-year history
of the Navy.
there has been only
one other attempted mutiny.
You have conducted your case
with striking ingenuity.
But your conduct
has been puzzling
and it does raise questions.
Has your conduct here
been responsible.
Lieutenant Greenwald?
[sighs]
The reprimand.
if there is to be one.
must come
from your own conscience.
Court finds defense counsel
has not been in contempt.
Recommendation to reprimand
denied.
Court stands in recess
until further notice.
[gavel raps]
What happens now?
Well. that's
the ball game.
And when do we find out?
If it's an acquittal.
soon.
If not. well.
they won't publish
their findings for weeks.
Okay.
You were terrific.
Thanks.
You murdered Queeg
up there.
Yes. I murdered him.
I'm grateful to you.
win or lose.
Okay.
What's wrong?
Not a thing.
Well. look. I need to
ask you something.
What now? Hmm?
Tom Keefer's having a party
tonight at the hotel.
This morning
he got a $10.000 advance
on his novel.
Well. I hope he sells
a million copies.
wins the Nobel Prize.
the Pulitzer Prize.
the Medal of Honor.
Wrap this whole thing up
in a nice. pink ribbon.
We're both invited.
What?
Look. I know what
you probably think.
But one way or another.
it's over.
I don't know
what I would have done
in Tom's place.
You'd go
to Keefer's party.
I'll go if you will.
if you think we should.
[pop music
playing on speakers]
Oh!
[cheering]
All right. quiet. quiet!
[whistles]
Quiet. you drunken bums
of the   Caine!
Here he is.
the guest of honor.
our courageous hero.
Hey!
Whoo!
Speech!
Speech. speech. speech!
[all chanting]
Speech! Speech! Speech!
No. no. no. no.
No. no. no. no. no. no!
Come on. Barney!
No. I-I-I'm drunker
than any of you guys.
[laughing]
I've been out
with the trial counsel.
trying to get her to take back
some of the dirty names
she called me.
[all chuckle]
I finally got her to shake hands
on the third bourbon and soda.
maybe the fourth.
That's good. That's good.
I had to talk loud and fast.
Steve.
I played some pretty
dirty pool in court.
Well...
Poor Katherine Challee. huh?
Yeah.
Mmm. So what's this?
[Maryk] Oh. it's
a double celebration.
[Greenwald]
A cake baked like a book.
$10.000
came in the mail today.
Advance on my novel.
[all cheering]
Very nice.
I got something
in the mail today too.
What's that. Barney?
Medical clearance.
Orders back to my ship.
Leaving tomorrow.
[all cheering]
Good.
Hey. that's great.
Ten thousand bucks.
huh?
[whistles]
You know.
maybe I should
return
the celebrated author's
toast.
Yes!
A little. little speech.
All right. all right. all right.
Here we go. here we go.
Okay.
[chuckles]
Uh. war novel. isn't it?
That's right.
I assume you gave the Navy
a good screwing. yeah?
Yeah?
[all laughing]
I don't think
that Navy Public Affairs
would approve it at any rate.
Well. somebody
should show up these stupid.
stuffy old pricks. huh?
Yeah!
Who's the hero. you?
If there's any similarities.
it is purely coincidental.
[crowd chuckles]
Okay. I'm warped
and I'm drunk.
But it suddenly seems to me.
if I wrote a war novel.
I would try to make a hero
out of Old Yellowstain.
Mmm.
Oh. come on.
That's right. I would.
No. No.
No. I would.
And I'll tell you why.
You see. Mr. Keefer.
while I was studying law
and you were
writing short stories.
and Willie Keith
was playing on the fields
of Princeton.
why. all that time.
these--
these old birds
we call regulars.
these stupid. stuffy pricks.
were standing guard
on our fat. dumb
and happy country.
Of course. they were
doing it for dough.
Same as anybody does anything.
But the question is.
in the last analysis...
I mean.
what do you do for dough?
You and me.
We're advancing
our free little careers.
So when 9/11 happened
and so many of us
rushed to join up
to fight those assholes
that crashed those planes
into the Twin Towers...
You couldn't fight them
with a law book.
so I-- I went active.
I joined the Navy.
Maybe I'd fly over
the Middle East
and bomb the shit
out of some terrorists.
right?
Whoo!
[crowd chuckling]
But there were already
a lot of guys
ready to do that.
And it wasn't me.
Not yet.
Wasn't Tom Keefer.
still in school.
or Willie Keith
in midshipman training.
but Old Yellowstain
and guys like him.
They were already on station.
ready to go.
And they're a lot smarter
than any of us.
I mean. let's-- Come on.
Let's not kid ourselves.
I mean. you don't get anywhere
in the all-volunteer.
upwardly mobile American Navy
unless you're goddamn good.
And these old-line pros.
they may not be up
on the latest video game.
but they know how
to get a tough job done.
And they were standing by.
and they were ready to do it.
while the rest of us
were still trying to
know shit from Shinola.
Barney. Hey. Barney.
It's over.
All right? Come on.
Let's just enjoy dinner.
Dinner's a sham. Steve.
You're guilty.
Of course.
you're only half guilty.
I mean. there was someone else
standing very neatly
out of the picture.
the guy who started
the whole idea
that Queeg's
a dangerous paranoiac.
who argued you into it
for six months.
who coined the nickname
Old Yellowstain.
who pointed out the psychiatry
books and Article 1108
and kept hammering it at you.
All right.
wait a minute here.
Oh. yeah. yeah. Mr. Keefer.
That's right. yeah.
I had to drag it
out of Steve.
Big dumb Polack
tried to tell me
it was all his own idea.
He wouldn't know a paranoid
from an anthropoid.
But you knew. didn't you?
You told him his medical log
was a clinical picture
of a paranoid.
You advised him
to go to Admiral Williams.
You offered to go with him.
You didn't get cold feet
until you stood on Williams's
quarterdeck in Bahrain.
Yeah. and then you ducked.
and you've been ducking
ever since.
I don't know
where you're
getting all this.
Biggest favor
you could have done Steve.
as far as winning
an acquittal went.
though I doubt
you realize it.
But if there is
a guilty party.
it's you.
If you hadn't filled
Steve Maryk's thick head
full of paranoia
and Article 1108.
why. he'd have--
he'd have got Queeg
to come north.
Or he'd have helped him
pull through to the south.
And the   Caine   wouldn't have
been yanked out of action.
And that--
that is your contribution
to the good old USA.
my friend--
pulling a minesweeper
out of the Persian Gulf
when it was most needed.
That-- That...
[laughs] ...and fucking
Multitudes. Multitudes.
You're drunk.
You know. excuse me. okay?
I'm all done.
You know. here's to you.
You bowled a perfect score.
You went after Queeg.
and you got him.
You kept your own whites
all starchy.
and you wrote your novel
proving the Navy sucks.
and you'll say. oh. you know.
you'll make a million dollars.
marry a movie star.
And so you won't mind
a little verbal reprimand
from me.
What does it all mean?
Hmm?
You know.
I-I defended Steve Maryk
because I realized
the wrong guy was on trial.
And the only way
I could defend him
was to murder Queeg for you.
And I'm pissed off
that I was put in that position.
I'm ashamed of what I did.
And that's why I'm drunk.
Queeg deserved better.
He served this country
for 21 years.
So I'm not gonna
eat your dinner.
drink your wine.
I'll make my toast
and go.
So here's to you.
Here's to   Caine's
favorite author.
Here's to your book.
[all gasping]
["Lowdown" playing]
Baby's into runnin' round
Hangin' with the crowd
Puttin' your business
In the street
Talkin' out loud
Sayin' you bought her
This and that
And how much you done spent
I swear she must believe
It's all heaven sent
Hey. boy
You better bring
Your chick around
To the sad. sad truth
The dirty lowdown
[backup singers vocalizing]
I wonder. wonder
Wonder. wonder who
Taught her how
To talk like that
I wonder. wonder
Wonder. wonder who
Gave her that big idea
Nothin' you can't handle
Nothin' you ain't got
Put your money on the table
And drive it off the lot
Turn on that old love light
And turn a "Maybe"
To a "Yes"
Same old schoolboy game
Got you into this mess
Hey. son
Better get on back to town
Face the sad old truth
The dirty lowdown
[backup singers vocalizing]
I wonder. wonder
Wonder. wonder who
Put those ideas
In your head
I wonder. wonder
Wonder. wonder who
Well
Come on back down
Little son
Dig the low. low
Low. low. lowdown
You ain't got to be so bad
Got to be so cold
This dog eat dog existence
Sure is getting old
Gotta have a jones for this
Jones for that
This runnin'
With the Joneses
Boy. just ain't
Where it's at. no. no
You gonna come back around
To the sad. sad truth
The dirty lowdown
[backup singers vocalizing]
I wonder. wonder
Wonder. wonder who
Got you thinking
Like that. boy
I wonder. wonder
Wonder. wonder who
Said I wonder. wonder
Oh. look out
For that lowdown
I wonder. wonder
Wonder. wonder who
That dirty. dirty
Dirty. dirty lowdown
I wonder. wonder
Wonder. wonder who
[vocalizing]
I wonder. wonder
Wonder. wonder who
Got you thinkin' like that
Got you thinkin'
By yourself
Lookin' that girl
In the face
It's a sad affair
Ashamed of yourself
I wonder. wonder
Wonder. wonder who